Buoyancy and Boyle’s Law
Part A: Buoyancy and Archimedes’ Principle
APPARATUS
1. Electronic balance with stand
2. Beaker
3. Metal object
4. Wooden block
5. Thread
6. Blue liquid
INTRODUCTION
The hydrostatic pressure P at a distance h below the surface of a fluid is given by
P = P 0 + ρgh
where P 0 is the pressure at the surface of the fluid and ρ is the density of the fluid.
The hydrostatic pressure exerts a normal force on all surfaces in contact with the fluid. As a result
there is a net upward force, called the Buoyant Force F B, whose magnitude is equal to the weight
of the fluid displaced, a relationship known as Archimedes’ Principle.
F B = ρgV
where V is the volume of the object below the surface of the fluid. In this experiment, you will
weigh objects in air and then measure the effect of submerging them in a fluid. A clearly labeled
Free Body Diagram should be used to determine the forces on the submerged objects in order to
relate your measurements to the density of the objects. If the fluid is water, assume the standard
value for ρ of 1000 kg/m3.
The electronic balance is turned on by pressing the button at the right. Pressing the button on
the left quickly will change the units displayed. We will work with the gram scale. Note that this
is the mass-equivalent of the force being measured, you do not have to actually multiply by the
numerical value of g, leave it as a symbol and it will eventually cancel out.
PROCEDURE
Determine the density of a solid more dense than water. Weighthemetalobjectandthen
suspenditfromthehookontheundersideofthebalancesothatitissubmergedinthebeaker
of water. This second weight, called the ”apparent weight” differs from the first due to the
buoyantforce. DrawthecorrespondingFreeBodyDiagramanduseittodeterminetheforces
involved, and to solve for the density of the submerged object. Calculate the buoyant force
37
and the density from your measurements. Use the table of densities on page 41 to estimate
thecompositionofthemetal. Doesitappearreasonablefromtheappearanceofthematerial?
Explain.
An alternate procedure is to place the beaker on top of the scale and measure the change
whentheobjectisjustsubmergedwhilebeingsupportedbythethread. Drythemetalobject
and weigh the beaker before (W 0) and after (W 1) the object is submerged. Do not let the
submerged object touch the bottom of the beaker.
What force in the Free Body Diagram does (W 1 −W 0) represent? How was this force com-
municated to the bottom of the beaker? (Hint: what happened to the level of water in the
beaker when the object was submerged?)
Determine the density of an object less dense than water. Weigh the wood block in air.
Attach the metal object to it so as to act as a ”sinker”. Use either method to determine the
density of the wood block. Explain the procedure that you chose, including appropriate Free
Body Diagrams.
Use the table of densities on page 41 to make a guess as to the type of wood provided.
Determine the density of a liquid other than water. You now have objects whose densities
areknown. Oneofthemcanbeusedasatestobjecttodeterminethedensityoftheunknown
liquid. Be sure that the object you use is as dry as possible. Use one of the earlier procedures
to determine the buoyant force on the object, and calculate the density of the liquid.
Use the table of densities to make a guess as to the composition of the unknown liquid.
Question (to be answered in your report):
How large a mass would have to be placed on top of the wooden block when floating in the water
so that the block would be completely submerged, i.e. its top would be level with the surface of
the water?
Part B: Boyle’s Law
APPARATUS
1. Sealed hypodermic syringe
2. Set of hooked weights
3. Loop of string
INTRODUCTION
Boyle’slawstatesthatforafixedmassofgasataconstanttemperature,theproductoftheabsolute
pressure p and volume V is a constant:
pV =k (1)
With a simple apparatus we can hang masses on the syringe plunger, thereby increasing the pres-
sure on the gas inside the syringe to a value above atmospheric pressure. The volume can be read
38
from the scale on the side of the syringe. The scale is in units of cc which means cm3. If the
pressure added by the weight of the masses is p add and the atmospheric pressure is p atm, then the
resulting total pressure is p total =p atm+p add.
PROCEDURE
1. Recordthecurrentatmosphericpressureandtemperatureasindicatedbyyourinstructor. (If
the current temperature is not available, assume 68◦F = 20◦C.) Atmospheric pressure may
be given in mbar or bar, where 1 bar = 105 Pa. Convert to Pascals.
2a. Check that the syringe is held firmly in the clamp and is vertical. Examine the scale and
record the volume V 0, indicated by the bottom edge of the plunger.
2b. Recordthesensitivityofthescale,thatis,thesmallestquantitythatcanbereadorestimated
on it. We will use this value as the uncertainty of our volume measurements.
2c. How many digits of V 0 are actually significant? (See the discussion on significant figures in
the introduction of the lab manual.)
3. We use a string to hang masses on the plunger. The weight of this mass acting on the area
of the plunger will increase the pressure of the trapped air and therefore change the volume.
We can simplify the calculation of added pressure for each value of mass by considering the
pressure p 1, at a load of 1 kg . There are four calculations:
(i) the weight of 1 kg, W 1,
(ii) the area of the face of the plunger A, (radius of the plunger = 0.715 cm),
(iii) the pressure added by the weight, p 1 =W 1 /A, and
(iv) conversion of the units to the standard unit of pressure, the Pascal. (1 Pa = 1 N/m2)
Check : p 1 should be about 3/4 of an atmosphere (1 atmosphere = 1.013×105 Pa).
Finally, trim p 1 to the number of significant figures found in 2c. (One extra digit may be
kept as a guard digit to avoid round-off problems.)
4. Use the headings below to prepare a table for your data. Note the second line of the heading
that contains the multiples and units to be used.
Mass M Volume V p add p total 1/p total
[kg] [10−6 m3] [105 Pa] [105 Pa] [10−5 Pa−1]
0 V 0 0 p atm
... ...
Your first entry will be for Mass = 0, and Volume = V 0 as found in 2a. Note that the units
have to be converted to m3 (1 cm = 10−2 m −→ 1 cm3 = 10−6 m3). p add will be zero, and
therefore p total is just equal to the atmospheric pressure.
39
5. Use the string to hang weights on the plunger. Use values of 500, 700, 1000, 1200 and 1500 g.
Wait at least a minute after each weight is added, so that the gas can come back to room
temperature. Increase the waiting time at the larger loads, so that the gas can return to
room temperature after being compressed. Use the time to complete some of the calculations
outlined below. Record the volume and complete the line in the table. Remember that
p add =[M/(1 kg)]×p 1, where p 1 is the additional pressure due to a 1-kilogram weight. Trim
p total of any digits that are not significant.
ANALYSIS
1. We will use Boyle’s law in the form:
V =k(1/p) (2)
Calculate all the reciprocals and put them into the last column of the table.
2a. Plot the graph of V vs. 1/p total. The origin should be included, although it is not a data
point. Besurethatyourscalesallowthegraphtooccupymostofthepage. (Wearefollowing
the usual practice of plotting the dependant variable on the y-axis.)
2b. Draw the single straight line that best represents the data. Use a transparent straight edge
(like a plastic ruler) to help fit the line. The line should be drawn completely across the
graph.
2c. Choosetwopointsontheline(notdatapoints)thatarewidelyseparatedtouseincalculating
the slope. Note that the slope will have units. Record this value as k slope.
3. The graph of equation 2 would go through the origin. With experimental data, the straight
line usually comes close to, but misses the origin. Determine the positive intercept with
either axis. Assume that the uncertainties in the value of these intercepts are 0.2 cm3 and
0.04×10−5Pa−1, respectively.
We can see whether this intercept is consistent with 0 by calculating the uncertainty ratio,
your intercept value divided by the appropriate uncertainty value. A small ratio (less than 2)
indicates good agreement. Large values (greater than 5) means disagreement. Intermediate
values can be described as ’fair’ or ’poor’ agreement and usually require further study.
4. The constant k can also be determined from the Ideal Gas Law, pV =nRT, where n is the
numberofmolesofgas(ρV 1 /MW),Risthegasconstant(8.31J/mol·K)andT istheabsolute
temperatureinKelvin. V 1 isthevolumemeasuredataloadof1kgandρisthecorresponding
density. For air, 80% 14N2 and 20% 16O2, the molecular weight MW = 29×10−3 kg/mol,
and ρ = 2.13 kg/m3 at the 1-kg load and room temperature. Calculate nRT from the data
given, and compare with k slope, assuming an uncertainty in k slope of 0.2×105 Pa·cm3.
40
Questions (to be answered in your report):
1. (a) What curve would equation 1 describe in a graph of p vs. V?
(b) How could we graph our data so as to obtain a straight line with slope k ?
2. How does your value of k slope agree with nRT? The uncertainty ratio here is
|k −nRT|
slope
uncertainty in k slope
3. If the uncertainty in the slope is ΔV (from procedure 2b.) divided by the range of your (1/p)
values, what is your uncertainty in k slope ?
Density Table
Metal ρ [g/cm3] Liquid ρ [g/cm3]
Aluminum 2.7 Alcohol, Methyl 0.80
Brass (ordinary yellow) 8.40 Carbon Tetrachloride 1.60
Bronze - phosphor 8.80 Gasoline 0.68
Copper 8.90 Mercury (20◦C) 13.55
Gold 19.3 Water (0◦C) 0.999
Iron - wrought 7.85 Water (4◦C) 1.000
Iron - gray cast 7.1 Water (15◦C) 0.997
Lead 11.3 Water ( 100◦C) 0.958
Steel 7.8
Tungsten 19.3 Stone ρ [g/cm3]
Zinc - wrought 7.2 Granite 2.7
Balsa wood (oven dry) 0.11 ...0.14 Limestone 2.7
Ebony 1.11 ...1.33 Marble 2.6 ...2.8
Oak 0.6 ...0.9 Mica schist 2.6
Pine - white (oven dry) 0.35 ...0.50 Sandstone 2.1 ...2.3
41
