Introduction
The aim of the laboratory exercise is to give the student an insight into the significance of the
physical ideas through actual manipulation of apparatus, and to bring him or her into contact
with the methods and instruments of physical investigation. Each exercise is designed to teach
or reinforce an important law of physics which, in most cases, has already been introduced in the
lecture and textbook. Thus the student is expected to be acquainted with the basic ideas and
terminology of an experiment before coming to the laboratory.
Theexercisesingeneralinvolvemeasurements,graphicalrepresentationofthedata,andcalculation
of a final result. The student should bear in mind that equipment can malfunction and final results
may differ from expected values by what may seem to be large amounts. This does not mean that
the exercise is a failure. The success of an experiment lies rather in the degree to which a student
has:
• mastered the physical principles involved,
• understood the theory and operation of the instruments used, and
• realized the significance of the final conclusions.
The student should know well in advance which exercise is to be done during a specific laboratory
period. The laboratory instructions and the relevant section of the text should be read before
coming to the laboratory. All of the apparatus at a laboratory place is entrusted to the care of
the student working at that place, and he or she is responsible for it. At the beginning of each
laboratory period it is the duty of the student to check over the apparatus and be sure that all of
the items listed in the instructions are present and in good condition. Any deficiencies should be
reported to the instructor immediately.
The procedure in each of these exercises has been planned so that it is possible for the prepared
student to perform the experiment in the scheduled laboratory period. Data sheets should be
initialed by your instructor or TA. Each student is required to submit a written report which
presentsthestudent’sowndata, resultsandthediscussionrequestedintheinstructions. Questions
thatappearintheinstructionsshouldbethoughtaboutandansweredatthecorrespondingposition
in the report. Answers should be written as complete sentences.
If possible, reports should be handed in at the end of the laboratory period. However, if this is not
possible, they must be submitted no later than the beginning of the next exercise OR the deadline
set by your instructor.
Reports will be graded, and when possible, discussed with the student. You may check with the
TA about your grade two weeks after you have submitted it.
2
Laboratory Manners
1. Smoking is not permitted in any college building.
2. Students must not bring food or drinks into the room.
3. Apparatus should not be taken from another position. If something is missing, notify the
instructor, and either equipment will be replaced or appropriate adjustments will be made.
4. Studentsshouldbedistributedasevenlyaspossibleamongtheavailablepositions. Generally,
no more than two students should be working together.
5. At the end of the period the equipment should left neatly arranged for the next class. Non-
functioning equipment should be reported before leaving. All papers and personal items have
to be removed.
