Measurements and Uncertainty
”Ameasurementresultiscompleteonlywhenaccompaniedbyaquantitativestatement
ofitsuncertainty. Theuncertaintyisrequiredinordertodecideiftheresultisadequate
for its intended purpose and to ascertain if it is consistent with other similar results.”
National Institute of Standards and Technology
1. Introduction
No measuring device can be read to an unlimited number of digits. In addition when we repeat
a measurement we often obtain a different value because of changes in conditions that we cannot
control. We are therefore uncertain as to the exact values of measurements. These uncertainties
make quantities calculated from such measurements uncertain as well.
Finally we will be trying to compare our calculated values with a value from the text in order to
verify that the physical principles we are studying are correct. Such comparisons come down to the
question ”Is the difference between our value and that in the text consistent with the uncertainty
in our measurements?”.
The topic of measurement involves many ideas. We shall introduce some of them by means of
definitions of the corresponding terms and examples.
Sensitivity - The smallest difference that can be read or estimated on a measuring instrument.
Generally a fraction of the smallest division appearing on a scale. About 0.5 mm on our
rulers. This results in readings being uncertain by at least this much.
Variability - Differences in the value of a measured quantity between repeated measurements.
Generally due to uncontrollable changes in conditions such as temperature or initial condi-
tions.
3
Range - The difference between largest and smallest repeated measurements. Range is a rough
measure of variability provided the number of repetitions is large enough. Six repetitions are
reasonable. Since range increases with repetitions, we must note the number used.
Uncertainty - How far from the correct value our result might be. Probability theory is needed
to make this definition precise, so we use a simplified approach.
We will take the larger of range and sensitivity as our measure of uncertainty.
Example:Inmeasuringthewidthofapieceofpapertornfromabook,wemightuseacmruler
with a sensitivity of 0.5 mm (0.05 cm), but find upon 6 repetitions that our measurements
range from 15.5 cm to 15.9 cm. Our uncertainty would therefore be 0.4 cm.
Precision - How tightly repeated measurements cluster around their average value. The uncer-
tainty described above is really a measure of our precision.
Accuracy - How far the average value might be from the ”true” value. A precise value might not
be accurate. For example: a stopped clock gives a precise reading, but is rarely accurate.
Factors that affect accuracy include how well our instruments are calibrated (the correctness
of the marked values) and how well the constants in our calculations are known. Accuracy is
affected by systematic errors, that is, mistakes that are repeated with each measurement.
Example: Measuring from the end of a ruler where the zero position is 1 mm in from the end.
Blunders - These are actual mistakes, such as reading an instrument pointer on the wrong scale.
They often show up when measurements are repeated and differences are larger than the
known uncertainty. For example: recording an 8 for a 3, or reading the wrong scale on a
meter..
Comparison - In order to confirm the physical principles we are learning, we calculate the value
of a constant whose value appears in our text. Since our calculated result has an uncertainty,
we will also calculate a Uncertainty Ratio, UR, which is defined as
|experimental value − text value|
UR=
Uncertainty
A value less than 1 indicates very good agreement, while values greater than 3 indicate
disagreement. Intermediate values need more examination. The uncertainty is not a limit,
but a measure of when the measured value begins to be less likely. There is always some
chance that the many effects that cause the variability will all affect the measurement in the
same way.
Example: Do the values 900 and 980 agree?
If the uncertainty is 100 , then UR =80/100=0.8 and they agree,
but if the uncertainty is 20 then UR =80/20=4 and they do not agree.
4
2. Combining Measurements
Consider the simple function R =ab when a and b have uncertainties of Δa and Δb. Then
ΔR =(a+Δa)(b+Δb)−ab=aΔb+bΔa+(Δb)(Δa)
Since uncertainties are generally a few percent of the value of the variables, the last product is
much less than the other two terms and can be dropped. Finally, we note that dividing by the
original value of R separates the terms by the variables.
ΔR Δa Δb
= +
R a b
The RULE for combining uncertainties is given in terms of fractional uncertainties, Δx/x. It is
simply that each factor contributes equally to the fractional uncertainty of the result.
Example: To calculate the acceleration of an object travelling the distance d in time t, we use the
relationship: a = 2dt−2. Suppose d and t have uncertainties Δd and Δt, what is the resulting
uncertainty in a, Δa?
Note that t is raised to the second power, so that Δt/t counts twice. Note also that the numerical
factor is the absolute value of the exponent. Being in the denominator counts the same as in the
numerator. The result is that
Δa Δd Δt
= +2
a d t
Examinationoftheindividualtermsoftenindicateswhichmeasurementscontributethemosttothe
uncertainty of the result. This shows us where more care or a more sensitive measuring instrument
is needed.
If d = 100 cm, Δd = 1 cm, t = 2.4 s and Δt = 0.2 s, then Δd/d = (1cm)/(100cm) = 0.01 = 1%
and 2Δt/t=2(0.2s)/(2.4s)=0.17=17%. Clearly the second term controls the uncertainty of the
result. Finally, Δa/a = 18%. (As you see, fractional uncertainties are most compactly expressed
as percentages, and since they are estimates, we round them to one or two meaningful digits.)
Calculating the value of a itself (2×100/2.42), the calculator will display 34.7222222. However, it
is clear that with Δa/a=18% meaning Δa≈6 cm s−2, most of those digits are meaningless. Our
result should be rounded to 35 cm s−2 with an uncertainty of 6 cm s−2.
In recording data and calculations we should have a sense of the uncertainty in our values and
not write figures that are not significant. Writing an excessive number of digits is incorrect as it
indicates an uncertainty only in the last decimal place written.
3. A General Rule for Significant Figures
In multiplication and division we need to count significant figures. These are just the number of
digits, starting with the first non-zero digit on the left. For instance: 0.023070 has five significant
figures, since we start with the 2 and count the zero in the middle and at the right.
The rule is: Round to the factor or divisor with the fewest significant figures. This can be done
either before the multiplication or division, or after.
5
Example: 7.434×0.26=1.93284=1.9 (2 significant figures in 0.26).
4. Reporting Uncertainties
There are two methods for reporting a value V, and its uncertainty U.
A. The technical form is ”(V ±U) units”.
Example: A measurement of 7.35 cm with an uncertainty of 0.02 cm would be written as
(7.35±0.02) cm. Note the use of parentheses to apply the unit to both parts.
B. Commonly, only the significant figures are reported, without an explicit uncertainty. This
implies that the uncertainty is 1 in the last decimal place.
Example: Reporting a result of 7.35 cm implies ±0.01 cm.
Note that writing 7.352786 cm when the uncertainty is really 0.01 cm is wrong.
C. Aspecialcaseariseswhenwehaveasituationlike1500±100. Scientificnotationallowsuseof
a simplified form, reporting the result as 1.5×103. In the case of a much smaller uncertainty,
1500±1,wereporttheresultas1.500×103,showingthatthezerosontherightaremeaningful.
5. Additional Remarks
A. In the technical literature, the uncertainty also called the error.
B. When measured values are in disagreement with standard values, physicists generally look
for mistakes (blunders), re-examining their equipment and procedures. Sometimes a single
measurementisclearlyverydifferentfromtheothersinaset, suchasreadingthewrongscale
on a clock for a single timing. Those values can be ignored, but NOT erased. A note should
be written next to any value that is ignored.
Given the limited time we will have, it will not always be possible to find a specific cause for
disagreement. However, it is useful to calculate at least a preliminary result while still in the
laboratory, so that you have some chance to find mistakes.
C. In adding the absolute values of the fractional uncertainties, we overestimate the total uncer-
tainty since the uncertainties can be either positive or negative. The correct statistical rule
is to add the fractional uncertainties in quadrature, i.e.

Δy 2 Δa 2 Δb 2
= +
y a b
D. The professional method of measuring variation is to use the Standard-Deviation of many
repeated measurements. This is the square root of the total squared deviations from the
mean, divided by the square root of the number of repetitions. It is also called the Root-
Mean-Square error.
6
E. Measurements and the quantities calculated from them usually have units. Where values are
tabulated, the units may be written once as part of the label for that column The units used
must appear in order to avoid confusion. There is a big difference between 15 mm, 15 cm
and 15 m.
