Centripetal Force
APPARATUS
1. Centripetal force apparatus
2. Set of slotted weights
3. Equal-arm balance with standard weights
4. Electric stop-clock
INTRODUCTION

Figure 1: Centripetal force apparatus
A mass m moving with constant speed v in a circular path of radius r must have acting on it a
centripetal force F, where the relationship between these quantities is
mv2
F =
r
28
Since v for this particle is given by 2πr/T or 2πrf, where T is the period (seconds per revolution
or s) and f is the number of revolutions per second or s−1, then
m(2πrf)2
F = =4π2mf2r (1)
r
In this experiment the mass that we examine as it moves in a horizontal circle is the bob in the
apparatus shown in Fig. 1. As indicated in Fig. 1, the shaft, cross arm, counterweight, bob and
spring are all rotated as a unit. The shaft is rotated manually by twirling it repeatedly between
your fingers at its lower end, where it is knurled. With a little practice it is possible to maintain
the distance r essentially constant, as evidenced for each revolution by the point of the bob passing
directly over the indicator rod, The centripetal force is provided by the spring.
The indicator rod is positioned in the following manner: with the bob at rest with the spring
removed, and with the crossarm in the appropriate direction, the indicator rod is positioned and
clamped by means of thumbscrews such that the point of the bob is directly above it, leaving a gap
of between 2 and 3 mm.
The force exerted by the (stretched) spring on the bob when the bob is in its proper orbit is
determined by a static test, as indicated in Fig. 2.
Figure 2: Static test
The mass m in Eq. 1 is the mass of the bob. A 100 g mass (slotted) may be clamped atop the bob
to increase its mass.
The entire apparatus should be leveled so that the shaft is vertical. Notice that viewing should be
done through the hole in the guard, against a white background.
29
PROCEDURE
Make any necessary adjustments of the three leveling screws so that the shaft is vertical.
The detailed procedure for checking Eq. 1 experimentally will be left to the student. At least two
values of r should be used, with two values of m for each r. A method for measuring r should be
thought out, the diameter of the shaft is 1.27 cm. The value of f should be determined by timing
50revolutionsofthebobandthenrepeatingthetimingforanadditional50revolutions. Ifthetimes
for 50 revolutions disagree by more than one-half second either a blunder in counting revolutions
has been made, or the point of the bob has not been maintained consistently in its proper circular
path. Ineithercase,themeasurementshouldberepeateduntilaconsistentsetofvaluesisobtained.
Itissuggestedthatyoureadthenextsection,onresultsandquestions,beforedoingtheexperiment.
RESULTS AND QUESTIONS
1. Exactly from where to where is r measured? Describe how you measured r.
2. Tabulate your experimental results.
3. Tabulate your calculated results for f, F from static tests, and F from Eq. 1 and the relative
difference between the F’s (in %), using the static F as standard.
4. Describe how to test whether the shaft is vertical without the use of a level. Why should it
be exactly vertical?
5. What are the functions of the guard, the white background, and the counterweight on the
crossarm?
6. Discuss your results.
30
