Linear Momentum
APPARATUS
1. The equipment shown in Figure 1.
2. Steel sphere.
3. Waxed paper.
4. A 30cm ruler.
5. Equal arm balance and known masses.
6. Meter stick.
7. Dowel rod to free stuck sphere from block.
INTRODUCTION
Theprincipleofconservationoflinearmomentumistobetestedasfollows: asteelsphereisallowed
to slide down the track, and immediately after leaving the end of the track plunges into a hole in a
wooden block and becomes stuck within the block. The block, which is suspended by four strings,
is initially at rest, but swings as a pendulum because of the impact. The momentum of the sphere
before the collision is compared to the momentum of the sphere and block just after the collision.

Figure 1: Entire Apparatus.
31
NOMENCLATURE:
m mass of the steel sphere, [g].
M mass of the wooden block, [g].
v velocity of the center of the sphere as it leaves the track, [cm/s]
V common velocity of sphere and block immediately after impact, [cm/s]
s,h,x,y,b,r various distances, indicated in Figures 2,3, and 4, all [cm]
PROCEDURE
Part I: Determination of the Velocity of the Sphere Before Impact
Placetheblockontheplatform, whereitwillhesafelyoutoftheway. Removethesliderguideand
slider from the box (See Fig. 4) and clamp a strip of waxed paper to the floor of the box. Allow
the steel sphere to roll down the track from its highest point. It will fall into the box and leave an
imprint. The end of the track is horizontal.
Determine the height b, through which the sphere falls; be aware that the track is a channel, and
the lowest point of the sphere is below the upper edges of the channel.
Make ten or more trials, and find the average value of the range r. From these data, calculate the
time of flight, and the velocity of the center of the sphere as it leaves the track.
s h
h
h2 - x2
h
Figure 2: Front view of the block.
y

x

Figure 4: Determination of the Figure 3: Side view of the block.
steel sphere’s velocity.
32
Part II: Determination of the Velocity of Sphere and Block After Impact.
Determinethemassofthesteelsphere. Alsorecordthemassofthewoodenblock,whichisinscribed
on the block.
Mount the slider guide and slider in the box. Suspend the block as indicated in Figure 1 at the
appropriate level such that the faces of the block are parallel to the corresponding faces of the box.
The block should hang freely, with a gap of about 1/8 inch between it and the track. The block
must be perfectly still while awaiting the arrival of the sphere.
Measure the distance h. Notice that when the block swings, the suspension inhibits rotation (see
Figs. 2 and 3). The horizontal distance x, through which the block swings after impact must be
measured (see below), and the vertical distance y is calculated from (see Fig. 3):

y =h− h2−x2
and, from energy considerations

V = 2gy (1)
To determine x, first position the slider so that it is barely touching the stationary block, and
record this distance setting as read from the slider guide. Next, perform a few trial runs until you
succeed in positioning the slider such that for ten successive impacts the block at the end of its
swing sometimes just barely flicks the slider, and at other times just barely fails to reach it. Note
the position of the slider and calculate x.
Calculate the linear momentum of the system before impact (mv) and after impact ([m+M]V),
and compute the relative difference (in %). Within the limits of your experimental accuracy, is
momentum conserved during the collision?
Questions (to be answered in your report):
1. Derive Equation (1), starting from general physics principles.
2. From your results, compute the fractional loss of kinetic energy of translation during impact.
Disregard rotational energy of the sphere.
3. Derive an expression for the fractional loss of kinetic energy of translation in terms only of
m and M, and compare with the value calculated in the preceding question. Consider the
collision as a totally inelastic one.
33
